matter of some number of months before
blinket becomes bigger than Z zato and
we'll be super proud when it actually
happens deepender goyel the famous Shar
from Shark Tank and founder of zomato
recently declared that its quick
Commerce brand blinket will be bigger
than zomato in one year and Adit picha
the 22-year-old founder of zepto
recently suggested that they could be a
demart skill company within the next 2
to 3 years and the fomo is so strong
right now that flip cart is also looking
at entering into this quick Commerce
segment we're only 5x away from dmart
scale which is a $30 billion company and
we're growing 2 to 3x every year and
dmart is growing 15 is% year on-ear
adjusted for goods inflation so you know
we could be a dmart scale company in the
next 2 3 years blink SG andart and zepto
are likely to find a formidable Runner
beside them as flip cart plans to
reenter the quick Commerce Race by mid
2024 quick Commerce and 10-minute
delivery actually started out as a fat
during covid and experts believed that
it would fade away once things opened up
similar to what happened to the edtech
sector but they were wrong quick
Commerce is going nowhere but upwards
and it is now even threatening giants
like Flipkart and Amazon in fact quick
Commerce penetration in India was
already among one of the highest in the
world by 2022 while it was just 3% in
Europe 7% in China India was way ahead
at 13% zepto alone has increased its
monthly active users from 1.8 million in
201 22 to 4 million in 2023 adding 2.2
million users in a single year and both
blanket and zepto have hit over $1
billion in gross annual sales run rate
in fact the impact has been so
Monumental that quick Commerce platforms
like zepto blinket and instamart are now
contributing between 30 to 50% of the
e-commerce sales of fmcg companies the
head of the domestic Market of krbl the
brand that sells India Gate price says
that they are witnessing an annual
growth rate of 1,500% in sales on these
quick Commerce platforms while in kirana
stores it is just 10% now you might be
wondering how are these companies able
to deliver Goods to your home in just 10
minutes how are they ever going to make
a profit with a business model that
seems inherently flawed and why are
giants like Flipkart and Reliance so
eager to get onto the quick Commerce
train to understand this you first have
to understand how the business model of
quick Commerce really works the arena is
currently dominated by three major
players the third biggest player with a
25% market share is zepto the poster boy
of quick Commerce in India founded by
two teenagers who dropped out from
Stanford zepto has left behind strong
players like dunzo and big basket even
though it began operations much later
than them in April 2021 on the second
number is sui's instamart as the name
suggests it was launched by sui in
August 2020 and it has been able to
capture 28% of the market so far by
tapping into sui's existing customer
base and finally the leader of the table
is blinket blinket initially started in
2013 as Growers and had a business model
similar to big basket they provided
slotted deliveries within a few hours or
on the next day but in 2021 Growers made
up a to under 15 minutes delivery and
rebranded itself to blinket then in 2022
it was acquired by zomato for almost
4500 CR rupees in an all stock deal and
blinket has a market share of 35% at the
bottom of the table is BB now which was
bought by Tata which has a market share
of 9% until recently there was also
Reliance back dunzo but it has been
struggling and scaling back recently if
you made it this far please subscribe to
my channel I promise my content will add
value for you moving on now all of these
quick Commerce companies work on a
similar business model which centers
around dark chores see the only way to
deliver items within 10 minutes of you
placing in order is by having those
items stored very close to you and this
is where dark stores come in these are
mini stores that are roughly 3,000 ft in
size and they are accessible only to the
employees of the store not even to their
delivery agents 90 to 95% of a customers
daily needs basket consists of the same
1500 skus SKU is short for shock keeping
unit or simply the number of products
these dark stores are densely stacked to
ensure they can store all these 1500
Skuse and more so they have everything
that a person might need at their home
and since they do not need to be in
front of customers the stores are
usually located in back alleys or
basement so think of dark stores as your
regular departmental stores except that
only employees can access them and they
are way less spacious and they are
optimized for maximizing space usage
these dark chores are strategically
placed in different localities to
minimize the difference between them and
the customers and each dark store
usually serves a radius of about 2 to 4
km around it so when you select your
location on the zepto app it
automatically selects the dark store
that is nearest to your location and
shows you the products available in that
store when you place an order it is sent
to that particular dark store each dark
store has a fleet of delivery agents
that are waiting in the store so when
the dark store receives the order it is
packed as quickly as possible picked up
by a delivery agent right there who
immediately leaves for your house and
arrives as soon as possible since the
distance between the dark store and your
home is so small the driver is able to
easily make it within a few minutes even
if it drives at a modest speed of 15 to
20 km/ hour so this is the business
model of quick Commerce speed and
convenience for items that are high in
demand and have a high rotation
frequency now this is in contrast to how
e-commerce companies like Amazon and
Flipkart work they have giant multi-acre
fulfillment centers that cater to
several cities in a radius of hundreds
of kilometers while having a single
Giant Center brings down costs it
obviously increases the time the order
is picked up from the Fulfillment center
then sent to a smaller Hub of your city
followed by the delivery Center of your
locality and here it is picked up by The
Delivery Agent along with several other
orders and then he follows a route
delivering all the orders one by one and
this factor of the number of deliveries
completed by an agent per day or per
hour is the single biggest paino of
quick Commerce to help you understand
this better let me simplify the unit
economics of this quick Commerce model
the central entity in the profit and
loss equation is the dark store
profitability of a quick Commerce
company depends on making individual
dark ches profitable let's say a dark St
receives an order of rupe 300 depending
on the contents of theorder order zepto
can have a margin of anywhere between 5%
to 40% groceries have a higher profit
margin of 18 to 40% while fmcg products
like oil or Rice have a margin of 4% to
15% so let's say that this is an average
order and the profit margin is about 20%
that means that the cost of the products
is 80% of rupes 300 or rupes 240 so the
margin left is 60 rupees now out of the
60 rupees you have to take out the fixed
cost for the dark storage as well like
salaries electricity and rent for a dark
store of blinket or zepto rent is almost
nothing because the revenue per square
foot for dark stores is the highest for
any Commerce format not only are these
stores small in area but recall that
they are also located in back alleys or
basements where rent is already very low
then on top of it the revenue generated
everyday is very high zepto alone is
doing $1 billion of annual sales run
rate with just 330 dark chores that
would convert into roughly 1.8 CR rupees
of Revenue per dark store so the fixed
cost for the dark stores are less than
10% of the revenue and this covers
everything including rent electricity
and employee salaries so 10% of 300 or
another 30 rupees goes to fixed cost and
now the margin left is just rupe 30 but
it does not end here zepto pays anywhere
between rup 25 to rupes 50 per delivery
to The Delivery Agent which means that
they're essentially losing rupees 20 per
order and then there are corporate
employees on their payroll server costs
and taxes in other words the business is
simply not profitable blinket lost
rupees 178 cres in 20123 while zepto
lost rupes
1,272 crores so does this mean that
quick Commerce will never be profitable
well not exactly you see these companies
can be made profitable and for that they
have three Liv iers number one is by
increasing the average order value
coming back to our example if the order
value is increased from rupe 300 to R
700 then the profit margin becomes rupes
140 but the fixed cost and the delivery
cost remain the same at rupes 30 and rup
50 respectively so the final profit per
order turns out to be rup 60 with 4 lakh
orders a day this can turn into 2.4 CR
rupees in profit every single day and if
you increase the average order value
even further then the final profit
margin increases exponentially this is
the liver that all these platforms are
prioritizing right now in 2022 the
average order value was rupes 553 for
blinket rupes 400 for zepto and rupes
500 for instamart but by 2023 this had
increased to rupes 635 for blinket about
rupees 500 for zepto and about rupes 550
for instamart now you must be wondering
how are they increasing their average
order value right well one way is by
introducing a low cart fee and a higher
delivery fee for small orders the driver
of sales continue to be the core
categories and to avoid the delivery fee
customers end up adding items from
adjacent categories but this only goes
so far blinket zepto and instamart
applies the small card fee on orders
below r99 only so while this can uplift
the minimum order value it can
definitely not thrust the average order
value over rupees 600 or 800 so the
strategy that they are employing instead
is adding more categories to their
offering initially these quick Commerce
companies relied on the fact that 90 to
95% of a customer's basket consists of
the same 1500 skus but they have been
steadily adding more and more categories
for example you can now easily buy
beauty and makeup products on blinket
and instamart as well something they
were not selling earlier blinket
recently started delivering PlayStation
5 under 10 minutes on their app as well
so they have expanded their skus over
6,000 for now as they continue to add
newer categories they are now planning
to add fashion electronics and apparel
as well and this increase in the number
of skus on their app is driving a
corresponding increase in the average
order value as well simply because now
there are more products that a customer
can choose from this theory is confirmed
by the increase in average order value
for all these platforms from 2022 to
2023 coinciding with them adding more
and more skus to their offering in in
the same time period so it's clearly
working as well this by the way is also
why quick Commerce companies like zepto
are directly competing with the likes of
Flipkart someone who earlier used to buy
clothes from Flipkart or makeup from
naika would now directly purchase it
from zepto or blinket and get it under
10 minutes instead of 1 to three
business days they can increase profits
even further by introducing their own
brand labels for different items for
example zepto has launched its own meat
brand by the name relish where they can
have a 5% to 20% higher profit margin
than selling meat from another brand
like Lous so this is how these companies
are using the first lever to increase
profits which is by increasing the
average order value the second lver that
they can and they are utilizing is
increasing the density of these chores
see the time taken to deliver an order
depends on the distance between the dark
store and the customer if the maximum
distance between a dark store and a
customer is brought down from 4 km to 2
km then a Delivery Agent could even
double the number of deliveries that he
can do per hour zepto blinket instamart
all of them are planning to increase
their dark store count by up to 40%
quite soon but these new stores will be
opened in the same cities which would
result in an increase in the density of
their chores So eventually there might
be no area in Mumbai where a Zep to dark
chore would be farther than 2 km but
note here that this liver only works in
densely populated areas like Metro and
tier one cities because otherwise the
number of orders per store would not be
high enough and a dark store needs at
least 1500 orders per day to be
profitable and the third and final lier
to profitability is advertising Revenue
getting millions of customers on their
app means that these quick Commerce
companies can now charge other companies
to advertise on them if you are
searching for chocolates on blinket then
it makes sense for Cadbury to advertise
there and push dairy milk towards you
setting up advertising platforms for
Brands costs almost nothing on this
scale and it results in ad Revenue that
is 95% to 99% pure profit zepto is now
clocking hundreds of crores in
advertising Revenue every single year so
this is how a handful of companies have
managed to increase the value of the
online grocery Market from about 10,000
in 2019 to almost 1 lakh 120,000 in
2024 while ze2 expects to become
profitable this year it's self in 2024
blinket says it will achieve operational
profitability by early 2025 now the
final question that you may be asking
yourself would be who is winning this
race well I did a lot of research
regarding this and the results were
quite surprising as I already said
earlier blinket is already the market
leader right now with a market share of
35% while instamart and zepto are almost
neck to neck at 28% and 25% respectively
but while blinket certainly has more
customers than zepto zepto has been
growing its daily active users much much
faster than any of its competitors after
launching in mid 2021 they had managed
to capture 133% of the market share in
less than a year by March 2022 and then
in another one year they managed to
almost double this share to
25% and what really blew my mind was how
they are actually doing this while you
definitely have to give it to them for
maximizing the operational efficiencies
to make the logist Logistics as seamless
as possible their expansion strategy
also tells a lot when you look at the
top three Z2 actually has a lower number
of stores than others but then when you
look at the number of cities where it is
currently present it is also much lower
than others they are present in just the
top 10 cities of India so what this
means is that while blinket has a store
density of about 17 stores per city
instamart has about 18 stores per city
zepto has a store density of 33 stores
per City
that is almost two times more than any
of its competitors and recall that I
explained earlier how store density is a
crucial factor in attaining
profitability so by having more stores
per city zepto is able to considerably
decrease its delivery times and increase
its profits this could be a major reason
why zepto is on track to achieve
profitability much earlier than any of
its competitors and this delivery speed
has the added benefit of increasing
customer satisfaction a survey revealed
that quick Commerce users in India
perceived zepto to be the fastest
delivery option available so to me it
looks like zepto is ahead of the curve
at least for now if you made it this far
please let me know in the comments which
is your favorite quick Commerce brand
subscribe here and follow me on LinkedIn
the link is in the description below
until I see you in the next video
goodbye